Why Democracy Works

“Democracy is the worst form of government, except for all the alternatives”, said Churchill in the British parliament in 1947, which ironically is the same year that Pakistan was formed.  Sadly for Pakistan, no one seems to have been listening.  Meanwhile India under Nehru quietly adopted a democratic constitution and built on it.  Sixty seven years later, and after having reaped the bitter harvest of four military dictatorships this truth seems at long last to being increasingly recognized in Pakistan.  However, as late as 2014, Imran Khan undertook a sustained assault on democracy.  It is a tribute to the hard lessons learnt by the nation that this brazen attempt to over-ride election results failed.  By the same token it is clear that there needs to be a better understanding in the country of why democratic forms of government have increasingly prevailed across the world.
Churchill’s statement above had the weight of history behind it.  The rest of the humanity was roughly at par with the west scientifically, technologically and politically until around 500-600 years ago.  But then the west made the unprecedented advancements in these fields, overwhelming the rest of the world in the process.  UK in particular was transformed from an unremarkable island to the global superpower of the 19th century.  The most significant factor behind this, arguably, was the change in the governance structure.  The process started almost exactly 800 years ago with the signing of the Magna Carta whereby the king was forced to end his absolute power by making it subject to the law of habeas corpus.  English settlers to North America literally brought this concept of the rule of law with them to the New World when, even before disembarking from the ships that brought them there, they signed the Mayflower Compact which provided the genesis of the US Constitution.  And it is no coincidence that the North America was to leave South America with its autocracies and “hacienda economies” behind within a couple of centuries.  The Ottoman Caliphate refused to entertain notions of a parliament, seeking only to adopt western military technology.  This “, and steadily lost ground until by the start of the 19th century it had become (as the Russian Tsar Alexander put it) the “sick man of Europe”.  It took the massive destruction of World War II to convince Germany and Japan that scientific advancement without providing democratic checks and balances were a recipe for disaster.   Today, democratic governments have become standard even in the former bastions of “strong men” in Africa, Latin America and Asia. 
The question that remained unanswered until recent years is:  What is it about democracy that has led to its emergence as a better form of governance that “all the alternatives” as Churchill put it?  A book titled “The Wisdom of the Crowds” by James Surowiecki, first published in 2004, provides powerful empirical evidence (including scientifically designed tests) to support the thesis that “…under the right circumstances, groups are remarkably intelligent, and are often smarter than the smartest people in them”.  And the reason he provides is simple:  No one individual, no matter how exalted, how charismatic, or how an expert in the field, has the mental capacity to comprehend all the complexities of any situation.  Checks and balances his notion how well rooted this notion is in the structure of the human brain    
He starts by describing an experiment done by a Scottish scientist in 1907 where the weight of an ox for sale in the market was determined more accurately by taking the average of the amount estimated by the entire crowd that participated in making a guess than by the “experts” in that crowd, namely those who actually sold and bought oxen in the market, i.e. the farmers and butchers.  From there he moves on to provide evidence from various other contexts, including “crowd sourcing” to find a sunken US submarine and including the design of the Google internet search engine that relies on the same concept to find the right webpage for a user from among the billions of pages on the internet.
.  And this is consistent with the voting pattern of Pakistani voters who, whenever given the chance to vote, have exercised that right wisely, sidelining religious parties.  
